Hello, I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington, and this is Prime Time Radio.
In this program, we'll talk with Secretary of Labor Robert Reich about a new program in which the public and private sectors are uniting with a single purpose, to make Americans aware of the necessity for saving more for retirement.
With savings rates fluctuating but still historically low, we'll tell you why what you planned on when you were 50 is probably not going to be enough at 65.
We'll also talk with the president of an institute that has as its main purpose the collection and dissemination of accurate information about retirement benefits and strategies.
We'll also meet the woman who almost single-handedly began the women's health movement, Barbara Seaman.
She turned up evidence that the use of the pill that shocked women and altered forever the way many women regarded their doctors and drug companies.
A mother, when she realized what had to be done, she's now a grandmother and still at it, organizing women to be more active in their relationships with doctors.
A busy hour ahead, so stay tuned.
Music
Hello, I'm Mike Cuthbert.
Welcome to Primetime Radio.
The other night I got a call from a former neighbor I had not heard from for over 40 years.
He got my number from a high school alumni yearbook that just came out.
He decided to call me on a whim.
Two years older than me, turns out he's been retired for several years.
He sounded like he was enjoying himself.
He must have planned well since he's not yet 60.
How well have you planned?
Are you confident that at 57 your days could be spent on the golf course and your weekends on your boat fishing in Florida, like my former neighbor?
Or are you like an increasing number of people I talk with who laugh at the word retirement?
Retirement?
Well, it's simply not on your horizon because you never expect to stop working.
In the next half hour or so, we'll look at the demands that retirement places on you, and we hope you'll give you some information that may help you determine whether or not that retirement that you'd like to anticipate is possible and what you have to do to make it possible.
We certainly have qualified help to lead our discussion.
With us in our Washington studios is Secretary of Labor Robert Reich.
Joining him is Dallas Salisbury, President of the Employee Benefit Research Institute.
Welcome, gentlemen.
Good to see you both.
Good to be here.
Secretary Reich, we know what you do pretty much, but for just a moment, let's find out what Mr. Salisbury does with the Employment Benefit Research Institute.
Mike Ebrey was started in 1978, and we try to provide a broad base of information and data on pension, health, retirement planning, and savings issues for the media and for people in the public.
In that role, then, I would assume both of you are vitally interested in finding out how aware is the average worker of the demands he's going to face in retirement.
How well educated, how aware is the average worker of what he's going to need, Secretary Rice?
Mike, as I go around the country, I am struck by how little people know about savings and retirement.
Gone forever.
are the days when you could join a company for 30 years and retire with a gold watch and a nice pension plan and not have to worry about it.
These days, more workers do have to take more responsibility, but there is not yet the information out there that they need.
Why?
What's happened?
Well, we've ended up seeing individuals faced with major corporate consolidations.
The small business that had 40 or 50 people in the community, the title insurance companies that were in every community, and they had their own career workers, they're all owned by some multinational corporation now, and they get swallowed up in a very different way.
So individuals really also face the Social Security issue.
Back when my great-grandmother retired, there were 35 people paying taxes to support her benefits.
By the time we baby boomers retire, there'll be two workers to pay those benefits.
It changes the dynamic, and the good news is that whereas my great-grandmother's life expectancy was well below age 65, ours is now pushing up, and if you hit age 65, you now readily can expect to live most people into their late 70s, 80s, and some into their 90s and beyond.
So both there's a cost pressure and also it's just we all face the joy of living longer.
That means you've got to have more money.
It means you have to have saved earlier, more often, more aggressively, and thought about it if you think you want to retire.
Companies are putting more and more responsibility on their employees, Mike, in terms of 401K plans, which are basically defined contribution plans.
Companies may join you, but you've got to make the investment decisions.
You have a lot more options as a worker as to how much you save, how you save, whether you save.
But also, let's face it.
Most workers these days are not able to save nearly as much as a generation before because wages have not kept up.
And indeed, the average 50-year-old man today has not had a raise if you adjust for inflation in 20 years.
One of the problems that I see as I talk to people around my neighborhood and read the press around the country is,
is that apparently a lot of workers, particularly in their 30s and 40s, simply don't believe Social Security is going to be there when they retire, and yet we don't hear any drastic rise in their savings rates.
What are these people expecting is going to be there when they retire?
Well, they actually, in our surveys, they both say they don't think it'll be there, and then when you ask the next question,
What are you going to rely on for your retirement income?
An amazing number say that they expect Social Security to provide half of their income.
So there's a context in between here, and it may well be that if you ask people a cute question about UFOs or social security, they choose the UFO because they think it's cute, but it may not actually reflect people yet being as realistic they should be about the future.
And it's not that social security won't be there.
It will be there.
But we've not been as blunt with people over time about what Social Security, in fact, doesn't provide in the way of a totally great lifestyle.
The magazines and the TV shows about people out on the golf course and on their boats in the harbors of Florida, those are not people that are living exclusively on Social Security.
So part of this is the education effort that the Department of Labor and the Institute and many other public and private organizations are undertaking to basically say to people,
Focus now, focus early, begin to plan, begin to save, and understand that if you want the lifestyle that we frequently picture as the golden years, you will have to have saved a great deal yourself.
Mike, some statistics that are actually a little bit, if not alarming, then at least interesting to people.
We did a survey of 50,000 households a couple of weeks ago, found that over half of retirees are dependent on
on Social Security as their only pension.
They don't have any private pension at all.
And half of these people who are dependent only on Social Security get only $7,000 from Social Security.
So again, as Dallas says, you're not talking about people who are very wealthy.
Most of these people are just getting by.
And if you add in health care costs, you see employers who...
actually are providing less and less health care to retirees.
In 1988, about 40% of retirees were getting employer-sponsored health care.
Now, about 33% of retirees get employer-sponsored health care.
We're talking, it seems to me, or it sounds to me, like a fundamental change in the attitude of employees toward their employer as sort of the guardian angel of last resort.
What you're seeming to tell me is that when we're going to work, we have to approach it with a different attitude.
We cannot expect a pension and the pension officer to guide us through this so that all we have to do is sign our name at the age of 65 and get the gold watch and have fun.
Long gone.
is the area of, to the extent that there was such an era, and we don't want to romanticize the past, but the era of corporate paternalism.
Companies now don't pick up quite as much of the tab.
They are cutting many benefits, but also people are changing jobs.
Sometimes they want to, sometimes they don't have much of a choice.
The average employee is changing job seven, eight times in a career.
It's a much more dynamic situation.
more exciting, fluid, but also anxiety-ridden workforce right now.
And how does all that job change affect pension planning?
Because it seems to me that if you are constantly changing jobs, you have to keep track of where your money was if you were vested in one firm and make sure that you get it with you when you travel.
Well, it's the one major advantage of the tremendous growth of the 401k plan that the Secretary mentioned is it fits better with this highly mobile individual.
And adding to the other comment the secretary made is let's not romanticize the past.
It really was only the very largest corporations and government employers in America that ever provided this paternalistic cushion.
Yet we wrote about it and talked about it so much that we misled the 70% of the workforce that has always worked in relatively small enterprises that didn't have all those great pension plans, didn't ever have the retiree medical, as the secretary has said.
And really what we're beginning to do is deal with the bulk of the American people and talk to them about the situation that affects them rather than this romanticism that might have been.
And it leads to the prospect that we have a system that may, in fact, be better molded to the changing labor force and to the bulk of the labor force.
And with education and early education for people to save, we hopefully can get rid of false optimism and motivate people to do more now.
That's the voice of Dallas Salisbury, president of the Employee Benefit Research Institute.
We're also joined by Secretary Robert Reich, Secretary of Labor.
All these things that we've been discussing, including the fact that most Americans don't know how much Social Security is going to provide for them, so they don't know how much they're going to need extra, needs some education.
And I understand that the retirement savings education campaign is going to be launched.
Why was it deemed necessary, and what is it going to do?
One of the most important things people need right now, Mike, is just good information, not only about how much Social Security is going to provide, on balance, only about 40% of pre-retirement earnings, but also what they can do to maximize every dollar of savings.
People are having a harder and harder time saving any money at all, so it's more important than ever that they get good information about how to make sure that those savings go longer.
How is this campaign going to be different from other things we have done, media campaigns or something else?
It seems, frankly looking at it, a little bit broader based.
Well, we've ended up creating a group at the urging of the Department of Labor called the American Savings Education Council.
That council now has over 150 public and private partners.
and an excellent brochure that the Labor Department put together at the initiation of its campaign.
This last week, ASEC went to print with 500,000 copies of that brochure, which will be distributed nationally by the partner organizations.
The essence is a difference here is that rather than this being a slam-duck, one-shot type of advertising campaign, we're building a coalition across America that is saying,
We're not going to worry about high tech.
We're going to worry about a basic drumbeat message of think about the future, think about saving, begin saving, and all of these organizations are going into it with
Better that we do a little bit consistently over the next two to three decades than we set some unobtainable goal and then go with a flash and stop.
So I think it's the picture, it's the sustainability, it's the breadth of the coalition.
And in addition, it's the dynamic leadership of Secretary Reich and others who are giving this some high visibility, some needed visibility,
and inviting in a broad-based group of people to help educate the public on this issue.
So I think you're right.
It's very different, and I think it's sustainable.
Mike, I want to return the compliment.
I think Dallas and other organizations have made this a public-private partnership that ideally is going to get the word out.
It's not just, as Dallas said, a one-shot over the bow.
We are going to give information to people, continue to give information to people, make sure that American workers, average people who...
really don't have time, often don't have the wherewithal to get the information they need about retirement, do in fact have those data.
In fact, since you're talking about a brochure, how is it going to be possible for our listeners to get in touch with the American Saving Education Council, get the brochure, and find out how to get involved?
They can call 202-659-0670 for purposes of that brochure.
And the Labor Department has a number as well for the brochure that they have, which I'm sure you can also provide to your listeners.
There is a competing, it seems to me, we constantly in this program talk about the sandwich generation.
We have a number of people who are taking care of their parents on one end.
their children's college education on the other, how possibly can either of you suggest a strategy for that sandwich generation to begin planning saving for retirement, for instance?
Let me give you an easy example, in other words, of how you're going to educate Americans on a plan for retirement.
How do they do that?
Let me give you just one specific example.
There are many, many examples.
As I travel around the country talking to workers, blue-collar, pink-collar, low-level, white-collar worker, and I talk about this issue of savings, and they tell me, truthfully, that they just can't save.
Given the pressures these days, they can't possibly save.
It turns out that there are tax-free savings programs that they could get involved in.
about one-third of them don't take advantage of it, although it would pay them to take advantage of it.
That is, if they put a little away, just a couple of dollars a week, they would, through the magic of compound interest and because of the tax-free nature of these savings plans, have a huge, relatively speaking, not huge by huge standards, but actually a very respectable savings amount at the end of 20 or 30 or 40 years.
For retirement only and still have room to handle the college?
If they don't take it out.
Now, again, one of the problems people have, as they have more and more responsibility for their own retirements, there's a great temptation to say, well, gee, I'd love to buy that house.
I'd love to be able to afford this or that.
Let me just take this retirement savings out to do that.
A lot of people don't realize the cost of taking retirement savings out of a plan.
What are some of those tax-free areas that you're talking about that people should look at more since, as you point out, they don't know about them now?
Individual retirement accounts already there.
We've already talked about 401K plans.
Employers provide some financing and some help.
There are others as well.
The most important thing, again, is that people find out about them.
These tax-free or tax-deferred savings plans do provide an enormous incentive to
They provide financial kind of almost a multiplier effect when people take advantage of them.
The other advantage is simply the breadth of information that's out there, the amount of material now on cable television or in the local newspaper, the number of additional finance columns, the fact that you see some of these things now in good, clean, graphic, easy-to-understood form in publications like USA Today.
So we're getting more information out.
It's easier to get it out.
Secondly, the secretary commented on the population that only has $7,000 a year in Social Security income, and it's a large population.
That hits home the fact that you do not have to accumulate money.
Huge amounts of money.
You don't need a million dollars in order to double your income if you're only making $7,000 a year from Social Security.
So I think part of these messages can get out to individuals or getting out.
And literally, if you go to one less movie a month, if you buy one less soft drink a day, there are very little things that for most Americans can add up to significant savings once they start to see it accumulate.
We have to be careful, Michael, that this is not a kind of castor oil approach.
You've got to take your medicine.
It's good for you.
You may not want to.
It's important to recognize that most Americans, and I keep on hearkening back to this message, but I think it is vitally important to recognize that most Americans are now having a hard time making ends meet, whether it's college education for the kids or it's taking care of parents, as you referred to before, or it's simply...
holding down two jobs or holding down extra hours in order to make ends meet.
This is tough for people.
So nobody is pretending that saving is going to be easy, but that's why this information is even more important than before.
You've got to make sure that every dollar saved goes
even further than before pardon my skepticism but when when people begin to educate people about the necessity for saving there will be a certain group of Americans entrepreneurs all who will take advantage of this with some quick money schemes for retirement they will use the necessity they will use your own education program I guess to perhaps float some scams if I again may be skeptical
What part of the American Saving Education Council's work is going to be to warn people about these scams and to get them into areas where the rewards may not be as spectacular, but they are more certain?
Well, the Labor Department brochure has a message in it, be careful, be prudent, be selective.
And the other brochures being put together by other partners in the campaign very much go along those lines.
Groups like Teachers Insurance Annuity, so-called TIACREF, and the educational market have amazing amounts of information available to people in higher education.
So there's more and more of that simple message, if you will, of be careful, but take prudent action.
And the Labor Department and other government agencies have programs, responsibilities in this area, the SEC, and they're continuing to take actions to try and educate the public.
But you're right.
There always is going to be that problem, and it's something that we all need to guard against.
But we don't also want to put out the castor oil message that for fear that you might have the money taken away from fraud, don't bother to save.
I think it's part of that necessity of making sure we have a fully responsible program, and all of us will be working to do that.
Many factors in our society seem to be accentuating what has come to be known as the education and particularly the wage gap.
What are the dangers of further class separation of Americans even in retirement?
I noted, for example, in some of the material I was reading,
Two-thirds of college degree workers have pension coverage on the job.
Excuse me, don't have pension coverage.
Three-quarter of non-college grads do.
There's an education wage gap there again.
What is the American Saving Education Council going to do to perhaps bring that gap closer together?
Well, it's one of the things that we've stressed as a virtue of the 401k plan is even in the heydays of non-regulation and very high taxes and no government regulation,
Only 12% of employees in small businesses in America had any type of retirement savings program.
In spite of many changes today, that number is higher.
And we now see over 450,000 employers, small employers that have created 401k plans or sponsored individual retirement accounts.
that are really making available to some of these lower income, lower educational level Americans the opportunity to save for the first time.
I would reinforce the Secretary's point, however, which is in many of those small firms, over half of the individuals that could be using the programs are still not using the programs, either because they're very young and don't yet think about it, or because, as he said, they have a very tight budget, which many have.
So I think part of this campaign for the Labor Department and for the Council is a campaign to encourage small employers in America, medium-sized employers in America that have never created any type of retirement savings program
to do that, to do that now, and to give people the opportunity to save through payroll deduction in a very tax-effective way.
And to make sure that all employees have an opportunity to take advantage of these pension programs and also these health programs.
One of the things, as you look at the data, and also as I travel around the country, Mike, one of the things that strikes me is, as you put it, there is a widening gap.
It is related to education.
in terms of accessibility to pensions, to all kinds of other company benefits.
If you don't have a high school degree, you're falling off the charts in terms of the access you might have to a company pension plan.
It wasn't great 20 years ago for people who barely had a high school degree, but now it's almost non-existent.
We've been talking about Social Security, and everybody calls that an entitlement.
Everybody assumes they are entitled to that.
But what other rights do American workers have to pension coverage?
Could it be, for example, that some American workers don't have pensions because they don't think they have a right to get one?
They're not eligible?
Well, we end up finding that of the third of the workers that have 401K plans available and that you survey them, half of them don't know that the plan is even available.
And employers are trying to expand dramatically the educational efforts with their workers so that they know that that opportunity is there.
They're trying to use payroll stuffers.
They're going to be using the brochure of the Labor Department.
They're going to be using public service announcements.
and trying to get that knowledge out.
But you're very correct.
If individuals are trying to hold down two jobs or three jobs, they're simultaneously trying to raise some children, they may not even get around to opening the envelopes that come in the door or reading the papers that are in the payroll stuff or at work.
So it isn't easy.
We don't mean to imply that this is an easy process.
But we do believe that is something that if you don't go about systematically trying to get that information out and get people to understand what their rights are and their opportunities are, there's no hope of change, if you will.
And it's with that in mind of trying to make sure that we expand.
knowledge, understanding, participation, and the rate of savings that we're going about these campaigns.
Mike, one of the first questions I ask when I go into a factory or an office or any place of business, a retail establishment, and talk to workers, I say, tell me about your company pension plan.
Does your employer have one?
And if so, tell me about it.
Often I get blank stares.
Now, there are such things as defined benefit plans.
They vest after a few years.
That is, if you don't stay with that employer a certain number of years, you may not be entitled.
Employees need to know how many years it takes to vest.
That's one of the things, again, you can find out simply by talking to your employer, talking to the personnel chief in your company.
You need to know.
Mr. Secretary, everything we've been talking about in this half hour assumes that pension rights will be protected regardless of who wins elections and what the nature of the Congress will be.
As you look at everything we've been talking about, what is beyond politics and what is not?
In other words, can people plan on what's going to come out of the American Savings Education Council to be there, or is politics going to
maybe wrench everything around again.
Well, Mike, first of all, Social Security is going to be there.
Americans would not stand for any erosion of Social Security.
I think it's a right.
It is something people are counting on.
There will not be any change in that, though.
Over the long term, as baby boomers move into their retirement years, obviously, there are going to have to be some reforms.
Number two, we do have to make sure that private pensions are fully funded.
Now, we have new legislation on the books.
President Clinton signed it and initiated it, which requires companies over a period of time, if they're underfunded, to fully fund their pension plans.
I have to tell you, I'm a little concerned right now because the House of Representatives has opened the barn door.
They are proposing new legislation that would allow companies to use any surpluses in their private pension plans to do whatever they want with, like the 1980s when all those leverage buyouts, remember that?
And hopefully we can close that barn door before it actually opens all the way.
Beyond those issues, it seems to me, individuals have potentially an enormous responsibility.
This is where information comes in.
There are no rights, but there are a lot of responsibilities.
Employers are, for the most part, acting responsibly.
I think individuals do need to know more.
They need to ask questions.
Often they don't know what questions to ask.
And this is where this public-private partnership we've entered into is so vitally important.
Information is the key.
Mr. Salisbury, Secretary Reich seems quite confident about the political realities, with the possible exception he just noted.
What about you?
Well, I would agree with the Secretary on his statement that Social Security is there for the long term.
I think what people need to focus there is not on the politics, it's on the reality.
And the reality is that for most Americans, Social Security does not provide an adequate retirement income today, won't tomorrow, and if they want a full income, they're going to need to save.
So it's not really the politics as much as understanding.
In terms of the private pension system, it's growing, it's strong.
There have been some side political issues like the Secretary referenced, but the bill that he was enacted to help fund pension plans is one that was worked on for many years.
It is proving to be effective, and the likelihood of its being repealed or changed dramatically, regardless of who's in Congress, is very low.
So I think there's security there.
Now, we've had discussions of the third major area, things like a flat tax, a consumption tax, major changes in the tax system that could fundamentally change the advantages and disadvantages of using a 401k plan or a 403b plan.
And we may see that type of change in the years ahead.
It seems to be popular with the public.
But one of the issues as we're thinking about people planning more, it's having individuals ask the question of what will the implications of those changes be for what I need to do in terms of my savings, what my employer may help me do or may do for me.
So I agree with him that there's reason to be generally confident and upbeat.
And it's principally because all politicians have parents, they have grandparents, they have children, and all politicians hope someday themselves, if need be, to retire in comfort and luxury.
And so there's going to always be a great attention of our public officials to assuring that retirement programs are there and that retirement safety is there.
I think there's one other message, though, and it's one that politicians today are probably, even with what some might think is negative conversation, helping.
And that's the statements of the Democratic senators like Kerry or the Republican senators like Simpson, saying think about Social Security, think about what it will provide, focus on the future, think about whether or not inflation will be high or low.
From our most recent surveys, only one-third of today's retired population says they plan for retirement before retiring.
Only 28% of today's active workers say they've yet thought at all about whether or not they'll have enough money in retirement.
And I think this message isn't a castor oil message.
It's a message that says do something for yourself.
Look out for your opportunity and look out, help yourself create the freedom to act and to retire when you want to.
And the way to have that freedom is not to rely just on Social Security.
It's not to wait for an employer to be paternalistic.
It's to begin planning early, saving early, and saving even small dollars if they're very small.
Because in this game, the ability to have some savings when you hit retirement versus no savings when you hit retirement is the difference between some comfort and sleeping while at night and worrying about, yes, how you're going to afford that castor oil.
Dallas Salisbury, the president of Employee Benefit Research Institute, thank you for being with us on Primetime Radio.
Wonderful to be here.
And Secretary Robert Reich, Secretary of Labor, we thank you as well for being with us.
Thank you, Mike.
By the way, we hope we've proved our case today that education about retirement is very necessary.
We mentioned a Labor Department brochure that may help you understand all of the issues much better.
Here is the phone number for you to call.
I'll mention it twice, 202-219-9247.
That's area code 202-9247.
219-9247.
Particularly for that two-thirds of you who we just heard don't even think about retirement, it might be time to start thinking about it.
Coming up, Barbara Seaman, one of the women who started the women's health movement as Primetime Radio continues.
Stay tuned.
Coming up, we meet the woman who challenged the pill and the whole medical establishment as well, as Primetime Radio continues.
Hello, I'm Mike Cuthbert.
Welcome back to Primetime Radio.
You know, 25 years ago, few women's voices were raised against the imperious attitude of doctors toward them.
Because of what happened to women like our guest in this edition of Primetime Radio, women began to say, whoa, to the medical establishment, and they began to ask pertinent questions about their care.
Many in the establishment called them impertinent and resented the questioning of their authority.
history however has tended to prove the women who took an active role in their own care correct they were reacting to centuries of medical assumptions that at one time looked at pregnancy in the female reproductive system as something apart from the rest of medicine just the other day i was looking at a book from the late nineteenth century called the theory and practice of midwifery as well as other diseases of women and children
Now let's meet the co-founder of the National Women's Health Network, trustee of the National Council on Women's Health, and a woman who, with a few others, began to change the idea of women being pregnant as a disease, began to get women respect when they went in the doctor's office.
Her name is Barbara Seaman.
Barbara, it's good to see you.
Boy, thank you very much.
It's wonderful to meet you at last.
It's always nice to meet a legend.
Well, ditto.
What was the level of public discussion of women's health matters in the 70s when you became active?
We should point out you were not a nurse or anything.
You were a journalist at the time.
Journalist, yeah.
We were drugged, shaved, humiliated, and stuck up in stirrups to deliver our children.
And if we asked any questions, we were told, let doctor do the worrying for you.
Don't worry your pretty little head about it.
And the
infamous, would I give you anything that would harm you?
Yes.
Well, what were the breakthrough moments of truth or the events that made you say, wait a minute, something's not right?
Yeah, sure.
You want me to tell the story of my baby son's famous
indigestion.
Well, in 1957, I gave birth to my first child in Cincinnati, Ohio, and I told my obstetrician that I planned to breastfeed, and he looked at me and he said, you wouldn't make a good cow.
I said, why not?
He said, well, you're too educated.
So I said, I think I'd like to breastfeed anyway.
My mother nursed me and my sisters, and
I like it.
I like the idea.
So he shook his head no, and he thought his point of view settled it.
I thought my point of view settled it.
So when I gave birth to my son Noah, I was given these pills every four hours, and I wanted to know what was in them, and nobody would tell me.
The nurses would stand over me and not go away until I took the pills, and they would say doctor's orders and stuff like that.
And Noah got very sick.
It turned out that among the postpartum medications I was given was a laxative that goes right into the breast milk.
It causes terrible, terrible indigestion in the babies.
And Noah, if it hadn't been discovered, I don't know whether he would have survived.
So when my daughter was born a couple of years later, my first daughter in 1960, I managed to get a very subversive article sold to a small...
magazine for new mothers called Mother's Manual and it was on how to breastfeed, how to subvert the breastfeeding practices in hospitals.
And I told women how to palm the pills and wait till the nurses went away and then throw them out.
And particularly I was very concerned about all the goo and ointments they gave you to put on your nipples because the nupricanol and alcohol and so on were not appealing to the baby and they really interfered with the baby learning how to nurse.
This is getting a little graphic.
I'm sorry.
No, that's okay.
This is what was done.
You realize a lot of the women listening shared that experience, but a lot of the women listening can't believe what you're saying, that this actually went on.
The ones who are my age, I'm 60.
I just had my 60th birthday.
The ones who are my age and my generation will probably remember this.
And the younger ones probably won't believe it.
And I hope they know that it's because of a few of us who rebelled that they're treated a little more respectfully now.
I don't know what difference it really makes.
I mean, we didn't do it because we wanted to get credit for it.
But still, it would be nice if once in a while somebody said, gee, it's not as bad anymore.
Anyhow, I published this very subversive article in Mother's Manual.
And it was a small magazine.
Maybe it had a circulation of 60,000.
And we got over 2,000 letters.
Mm-hmm.
So it became clear to me that there were a lot of women out there who really, they were under a mask of compliance in the doctor's waiting room or in the hospital.
They were really hungry for health information that was truthful and not patronizing.
How did all this translate into your focus, which resulted in the now famous book, The Doctor's Case Against the Pill?
which just was reissued in a 25th anniversary edition.
As usual, it was the year late.
It was published in 1969, and so the 25th anniversary edition of The Doctor's Case Against the Pillow should have come out in 19...
94, right?
Yes.
I can do that edition.
But I was adding new chapters on the pill at 35 and Norplant.
And once you get into issues like that, the research always turns out to be much more complicated.
It always turns out there's a lot that's being concealed.
So it took me a whole year to do the new material.
But what happened in the 60s was that, due to my experience with the laxative, I was very wary of any pills that doctors offered.
So when the pill came out, I said, no thanks, I didn't want it.
But due to my having turned to a career in medical reporting, by the middle 60s, I had three columns in women's magazines.
I had my own column in the Ladies' Home Journal.
I was writing a column with my physician husband in Brides' Magazine, and I was ghostwriting a column in Good Housekeeping for a Celebrity.
So I was reaching about 18 or 20 million women a month.
and part of my beat was the new birth control technology.
That was the most important medical news of the 60s, the pill and the IUD.
Boy, the pill was revolutionary.
Do you remember how?
Oh, sure.
It was revolutionary not only for women but for men as well.
More better for men.
I think so, probably.
On balance, yes.
Now I haven't admitted that.
Let's quickly move on.
Yeah, the guys loved it, and why not?
As it's turning out now, it was a terrible thing that they abandoned the condom, so...
Eagerly because we've paid a big price for that with the rebounding of the sexually transmitted diseases now.
But anyhow, by the way, the new condoms are much better.
I just want to say that.
It's really important for people to know that.
There are new condoms that are treated with spermicides, and they're really very reliable.
And also, there are a lot of different textures, sizes, shapes, and so on.
So there's more of a choice.
It's not as unpleasant a method as it was before.
Well, if the condom is better, what's happened to the pill since your book, a lot more research on it, and the fact, let's face it, most women still apparently turn to the pill as their first choice for contraception.
I'm not sure that's true anymore.
It got very popular again in the late 80s after the FDA made the manufacturers take all the high-dose pills off the market, and then the pill companies were very smart with their campaign to say, oh, the pills now are...
only one-tenth of the hormones that they used to have and they're perfectly safe.
So for a few years the women came back to the pills.
But now they're drifting off again for two reasons.
One is they're really getting concerned about the sexually transmitted diseases and they know that it's important to return to the barriers if they possibly can.
And the other reason is that the low-dose pills have their own problems, which I'll be glad to get to in a moment.
But I did want to say, I didn't finish answering your question before,
Because I had all these magazine columns, whenever I wrote something on the pill, I was deluged with reader inquiries.
And often they would say, oh, I had that side effect, but my doctor said it couldn't be from the pill.
It was all in my mind.
And over and over, my readers would use a phrase like, I felt as if I was up against a brick wall.
And some of the women were having side effects that were reversible.
weight gain, bloating, depression, pregnancy symptoms.
But some of them had terribly serious side effects, particularly blood clots and serious depressions.
And I just felt more and more that a cover-up was taking place.
And I found that there was information being published in the medical journals that was not getting to women.
So I went to Columbia University Journalism School.
I got a science writing fellowship.
I took a lot of courses on how to tell a good scientific study from a bad one.
And then I wrote The Doctor's Case Against the Pill, which came out in 1969.
And I was writing it for my women's magazine readers.
I just wanted them to have informed consent, to make up their own mind.
I urged that the FDA require a patient package insert so that women could see, first of all, if they shouldn't take the pill at all, if they were in a high-risk group.
I mean, any woman over 35 who smokes who takes the pill is almost asking for a heart attack, and that's still to some extent true.
And also, if they started getting into trouble, they would know right away that it was from the pill because...
Often women didn't associate their problems with the pill.
If nobody told you that if you start coughing up blood and get chest pain, if nobody told you that that might be because you had a pulmonary embolism from the pill, you wouldn't think it was associated with the pill.
So that was my obsession that women should be able to make up their own mind.
our guest is barbara seaman's share her book is the doctor's uh barbara seaman why did i add an s the doctor's case against the pill and women's health worker she is as we mentioned co-founder of the national women's health network trustee of the national council of women's health and recently got involved in grandmothers for full disclosure why was that group necessary uh grant oh because i'm a grandmother and so are many of my friends and um
When my older granddaughter, Sophia, was born, somebody said to me, how has that changed your life?
And I said, I worry more about the ozone layer than I used to.
And I feel that the generation that are parents now are so busy and stressed out with their many jobs that it's very hard for them to keep up with issues in health care and the environment and the food supply.
that are really critical to the long-range health and welfare of their children.
And some of the grandparent generation have a little more time.
So we are trying to get the news out that people are entitled to have.
For example, on the 35th anniversary of the birth control pill, the 35th birthday, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists had a big celebration.
They even had a birthday cake.
which I thought was a little ghoulish, because on the one hand, the pill has liberated many women, but on the other hand, other women have died, so it's not clearly something you have a birthday cake in.
They had a birthday cake in the shape of a pill container.
And then they started this educational campaign on the health benefits of the pill.
And there was something phony about it, so I pushed very hard, and I did my little muckraking investigations, and I found out that this educational campaign...
was not done with their own money.
It was done with an educational grant from Ortho, which is the largest pill manufacturer.
And I got a little critical about it.
I said, well, then you should tell the reporters and you should tell the public that this campaign is being financed by the world's largest pill manufacturer.
And they said to me, oh, no, it's all right because it's an unrestricted educational grant, and we're not mentioning brand names, so we don't have to tell the public.
Now, that's ridiculous.
When it's the largest pill manufacturer, you don't have to mention brand names.
If pill sales increase, there's a 40% or 50% chance that the product that the new user is going to be buying is an ortho product.
And the same thing, by the way, Eli Lilly does the same thing with Mental Health Day and its antidepressant.
It gives a lot of money to the psychiatric organizations to promote essentially the use of Prozac without
anyone ever telling the public that this is funded by a special interest group.
Several weeks ago in this program, we heard from the FDA, going to disclosure, that they are being much more aggressive in requiring disclosure of side effects, particularly in the area of prescription drugs.
And we had a member of the Center for Science and the Public Interest sitting here who agreed they were doing better.
How do you see the situation as a member of grandmothers for full disclosure?
Well, I'm not only a member of, uh, founder of Grandma's Full Disclosure, but don't forget that I was the person who invented the idea of the, they're now called med guides, but they were first called patient package inserts.
And they came about because, um, the, when the doctor's case against the pill first came out, it persuaded Senator Gaylord Nelson to hold hearings on whether women were being informed.
And, uh,
And we kept pushing and pushing, and finally on the last day of the hearing, the FDA commissioner said he had decided that he would order a warning to be enclosed with the birth control pills, and that was the first.
That set the precedent.
My answer about how they're doing now is not well enough.
Actually, I'm going to have lunch today with Dr. Lou Morris, who's the fellow at the FDA that's in charge of this whole program.
Lou has worked very hard.
But in the end, they always sort of waffle out of it, and they don't really make it mandatory.
And here's what I think that your listeners can do, Mike.
The fact is that the druggists used to say, and with some justice, they didn't want to have mandatory patient package inserts with everything.
It was true that with the pill, it really reduced the deaths and serious injuries.
But they said there just wasn't room on the drugstore shelves to handle all this paper.
Well, with the advent of computers, that's completely changed.
They can have programs in their computers.
All they have to do is push a few buttons, and they can print out a piece of paper to give everybody who's having a prescription pill.
But in this free-for-all environment where the FDA isn't regulating how much disclosure they have to give, what happens is that you can go into one drugstore, and you may find that the pharmacist has bought a program,
which gives you risk assessment on the side effects as well as telling you whether to take it before or after meals and what other drugs not to take with it and everything else, where it's really comprehensive.
And you can make up your own mind whether the risks are worth it to you.
But other drugstores are buying very superficial inserts, that patient information labeling, that really only tell them how many times a day to take it and things like that.
Don't even tell them what the danger signals are that they might be having a serious adverse reaction.
So my urging to all your good listeners, and I know many of your listeners are the kinds of people who really do care about these kinds of things and establishing their own rights, is let your pharmacist know.
Right now, that's one of the most important things you can do.
Let your pharmacist know that you want to get a med guide or a patient package insert or labeling information.
that really goes into details.
You don't want to have to keep running to the library and looking up physician's desk reference or buying it every year.
It's very expensive.
You think you have the right to get it with your prescription being filled.
And also, if you care to, write to the FDA commissioner in support that you think patients are entitled to have full information, full disclosure about all prescription drugs.
Mike, if they want to join Grandmothers for Full Disclosure or they want information about the National Women's Health Network, which is also working on this issue, how would they get in touch with me?
They can simply get in touch with Primetime Radio, and we'll give them a number at the end of the program to do that.
You'll leave us the information, and we'll get them in touch with you.
Oh, bless you.
That would be wonderful.
Isn't that nice of us?
Oh, well, you're good folks.
You've touched on so many things that are fascinating, and I've got to hit this one because I heard a fascinating discussion just a few weeks ago.
A female doctor, a woman doctor, was dealing with estrogen therapy, and she was using percentages, and in the interest of making women or allowing women to make up their own minds, she fell on the side of therapy.
But she presented a very fair case, and she said, look, if the chances of you getting cancer are increased by 2%,
By taking estrogen therapy.
I believe these numbers are correct.
The chances of avoiding osteoporosis are increased by 10%.
How do you judge the trade-offs?
Now, she said that the chances of cancer being lower than the chances of osteoporosis made her fall on the side of estrogen therapy because the estrogen therapy helped prevent osteoporosis.
But how do you, as a woman, judge these trade-offs, and how can any woman, given these strange kinds of choices...
In women and the crisis, excuse me, in the doctor's case against the pill, in my new chapter on the pill, I discuss the whole question of the estrogenization of American women and how it seems to have been a factor in the rising breast cancer rates, which are going up 2% a year.
And not only that, but it's almost all in the estrogen-receptive cancers.
There are two kinds of breast cancers, and it used to be that the preponderance of them were the ones that did not have estrogen receptors, but now there's this big increase.
and nobody knows how much is from the pill, how much is from the menopause estrogens, how much is from the pesticides that have estrogenic effects, how much is from the estrogens in the environment, because for so many years the cattle and poultry all got estrogens, and they weren't degradable by their stomach acids.
They got into the food chain and the water.
A lot about this is always being published in England, as you know, but somehow the manufacturers keep it from getting much attention here.
So my answer on the estrogen query for middle-aged women is that
I believe that somebody is having really severe menopause.
If I had had a really severe menopause, I wouldn't have objected to taking it for a few years.
But once you get past five years, you are really, I believe, increasing your cancer risks.
And the truth is that while more women in the last decades of life succumb to heart disease than anything else, and while more than a few have
injuries from falls, hip fractures that turn out to be fatal.
We're talking about 80s and 90s mostly here, maybe 70s also.
But cancer is a killer of women in their prime.
And so for the individual woman, she is likely to, if she gets cancer, she's more likely to lose more years out of her potential lifespan.
So I think another thing that's very important was said by Dr. Graham Kolditz at Harvard, who's head of the nurses' study, the famous nurses' study that includes the study of estrogen.
He says, well, for heart disease and osteoporosis, we know what to do.
We know things we can do to prevent them.
We know to have a low-fat diet, to have enough calcium in our diet.
We know to get various kinds of exercise.
But he said, we don't know what to do to prevent breast cancer.
So why take something to prevent heart disease and osteoporosis that's going to increase your chances of cancer when there are other things you can do to prevent heart disease and osteoporosis?
So that's where I fall.
But of course...
The decision is up to the individual woman, but she's got to be given the true facts and think about it very seriously.
And when these doctors go around saying, oh, more women die from heart disease than from cancer, they're leaving out what we all know, which is that for middle-aged women, some weeks we're afraid to pick up the telephone.
We're hearing about another friend with cancer.
So I think the doctors are sort of making fools of themselves because they're not acknowledging.
that the cancer is striking more women in their prime, or seems to be.
We're almost out of time, Barbara Seaman.
More women are in medicine than were in the 1970s.
We are currently undergoing a national debate on the changing focus and nature of our health care system.
As you look forward 10 years, what do you anticipate the new problems in women's health are going to be?
Oh, wow.
Very quickly.
I think...
They could go in any direction because technology is changing things so rapidly and the whole cutback in health care services is changing things so rapidly.
It's impossible to predict, Mike, and that's why I think it's more important than ever for us to take charge of our own health care.
And I do hope, for example, if any of my listeners are taking the pill or Norplant or have a daughter or granddaughter who does, I hope they will take a look at the new information in my book, The Doctor's Case Against the Pills.
I'm sure you can get it at a library.
If not, ask the library to order it.
I'm not trying to sell a lot of books.
Really not.
I just want people.
They're subject to so much propaganda from ortho and the other drug companies.
We have, as I said, run out of time, unfortunately.
We could talk with Barbara Seaman a lot, as she has lots to tell, both in terms of history and what's going on currently.
Once again, her book, the 25th anniversary publication of The Doctor's Case Against the Pill, is out.
We thank you very much for joining us on Primetime Radio.
Oh, thank you very much.
It was really a treat to be here.
We'd like to hear your reactions to all or any of our primetime programs, and we've set up a toll-free number for your calls.
It's 1-800-424-9343.
That's 800-424-9343.
Cassettes of any primetime radio programs can be ordered for $4 each at the same number.
Primetime Radio is a production of AARP.
The show is produced by John Myers and engineered by Brian Hemler.
Our associate producer is Janelle Haskell.
I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington.
See you again next week.
The thing about elder law I like the most is I'm not fighting with other lawyers.
Lawyer and talk show host Len Tillem.
Hello, I'm Jim Harriot with Mature Focus.
Today, a look at elder law.
Len Tillem is an attorney who specializes in elder law.
He's also a nationally syndicated columnist on the subject and hosts a radio talk show in California about it.
People come into your office and
They're older.
They seem to have their lives together.
They're organized.
And even though you're talking about who gets their stuff after they die, they're not upset.
You know, there's a peace about it.
Len counts that as one of the most important things he helps do, keep peace in the family.
The main things that elder law deals with is the first thing is trusts and estates or who gets my stuff when I die.
And another important issue is medic, we call it here in California, Medi-Cal planning.
In the rest of the country, it's Medicaid.
He says if grandpa or grandma has to go into a nursing home, what's going to happen to all the money?
California, a nursing home is $3,500 a month.
In New York, I hear it's about $5,500 a month.
And I don't care how rich you are, if somebody winds up in a nursing home, after a while they're going to be broke.
People clearly need Medicaid to help pay their bills.
We help people transfer assets to qualify for Medi-Cal or Medicaid sooner rather than later.
Then there's the difference between a will and a living trust.
Len says a will is a letter to the judge.
And you know what the letter says?
The letter says, Dear Judge, I'm dead.
This is what I want you to do with my stuff.
But that involves probate, which in California, for example, can take a year and a half and cost several thousand in fees.
To avoid that, you can set up a revocable living trust.
Think of it as a corporation.
And the way they work is you give your house to the trust.
In other words, Bill and Mary Smith will sign a deed saying,
that we, Bill and Mary Smith, give our house to the Bill and Mary Smith Trust.
What that means is after they die, the trust, think of the trust as a corporation.
You know, when Walt Disney died, Disneyland State opened.
When Lee Iacocca left Chrysler, they still made cars.
Well, when mom and dad die, the trust names as successor trustees, new managers, the kids, and the kids take the house out of the trust because the trust owns the house and gives it to themselves as
beneficiaries.
And that's it.
Glenn Tillem has this advice.
Be suspicious, folks, out there.
If you have a lawyer who says to you, you don't need a trust, you're not rich enough, you only have $300,000, my advice is start looking for another lawyer.
Probate used to be known as lawyers' social security.
Now, it should be said, a living trust does not protect assets from being sued.
But Glenn says, despite what we see in those movies and TV shows, most people are not sued.
The most dangerous thing people do
is drive a car and own a home because the mailman could get bitten by your dog or slip on some ice.
If you have homeowner's insurance, if you have automobile insurance, I'm not crazy about insurance companies, but when you get sued, they do a good job protecting you.
And that's what you have insurance for.
Just ahead, some advice about money for the grandchildren and one of the most frequently asked questions by listeners to Len's talk show.
Elder law specialist and attorney Len Tillem says you should give money to younger grandchildren in a trust controlled by the grandkids' parents, your children.
Please don't get offended, but when it comes to money, your grandchild is as dumb as a rock at 18.
I mean, you give an 18-year-old $10,000, he's going to decide, gee, it's a good idea.
to buy a ninja motorcycle so I can discover America and myself.
Don't give it to the grandkids.
Give it.
Give money to your grandchildren in a trust that your children or the grandkids' parents can hold to them and sprinkle on them, give to them as they need it.
But it's not just a problem with youngsters.
He says of all the questions asked him by listeners to his talk show.
The biggest one that everybody asks is, my son-in-law is going to buy a Lexus with my money after I die.
He doesn't know the value of a dollar.
How do I stop that?
And elder law specialist Len Tillam says one of the biggest things to remember is not to worry about it, that things have a way of sorting themselves out.
As a matter of fact, he has a theory.
After you die, your perspective on what your children do with your money will change radically.
Of course, it's just a theory.
So far, no one's come back to prove it one way or another.
Music
That's the weekend edition of Mature Focus, a production of AARP, brought to you in part by Buick, the new symbol for quality in America.
Until next time, I'm Jim Harriet in Washington.